Everyone in this lecture, we are going to talk about recursion basics.
So many people get fear when they hear the word recursion because it's a pretty confusing technique,
especially for the beginners.
But we will try to explain it in a simplified manner with the help of certain examples.
And we will do a lot of problem solving on recursion as well.
So let's see, what is
A recursion. So as I said it's a technique in computer science where a solution to a problem.
Okay.
Depends upon solution to smaller instances of the same problem.
Again, this is something that what you need to remember.
Let's say you have a problem and that problem is a complex problem.
That means that it has a larger input.
Let's say And you want to break this problem into maybe smaller instances of the same problem.
Maybe you break this into three sub problems of size n/3 and n/3 and n/3.
Okay.
So our idea would be to solve sub problems and combine the answers of the sub problems to get the answer for
a bigger problem.
Okay.
So that this is something what we would be doing and what is the meaning of smaller instances of the
same problem?
Let's say we want to compute some function F.
Then the smaller problem will also be on the same function F something like this.
So I try to explain, with the help of one very simple example, let us see the most classical example
that is taken to.
each recursion that is the factorial question.
Okay.
So let's say I want to compute a factorial of a number n and okay, let's say that number n is five.
And I want to compute F(N) that is equal to N!.
This is something what I want to compute.
Now, although this is a easier problem, but still we can break this problem recursively.
We can break it into a smaller sub problem of the same type.
So you know, what is the property of factorial?
So N factorial is nothing but it can be written as N*(N-1)!
What is (N-1)!
it is nothing but F(N-1)
So it can be written as like this.
So what we have done, we have written a larger problem in terms of a smaller sub problem of the same
type.
Now, how do we compute it algorithmically?
For example, if I want to compute five factorial, this will be written as 5 X 4!
This 4! can be written as 4 X 3!
This can be written as 3 X 2!
This can be written as 2 X 1!
This can be written as 1 X 0! at 0!.
We know we have reached a point where the problem cannot be breaker down further.
So such a point is known as base case.
So let us see.
What are these terms?
So at this point we would say we have reached a guess which is known as base case.
That means we we cannot reduce of a problem further.
And the base case is the case where we know the answer of the sub problem ok so 0! Is nothing but 1
is nothing but one.
So what we will return, we will return 1 X 1 = 1, and this one will go back here.
So this would become 2 X 1
i.e 2
And this two will go back here.
This is nothing but 3 X 2.
That is equal to six.
And this six will go here.
So 3! will get replaced by six.
This would become 4 X 6.
That is 24.
This 24 will go here and 5 X.
24 would be 120.
So when we would be dealing with recursion, we will see two directions in one direction.
We are breaking the problem and we are trying to simplifying it.
So that means we are moving towards the base case.
and another direction would be in which we are again coming back from
the base case towards the main problem.
Okay.
So this is from top to down.
And this is from down to top.
Okay.
So we would be doing work in two directions.
First, we would be breaking and simplifying the problem.
Then we would be combining the solutions to form the answers of the bigger sub  problem that we have left.
So this is how this recursion is going to work.
Now, you may ask how does it will work in the form of a program?
Okay.
So when we'll write the code.
We will take the help of call stack, function call stack.
Okay.
So I hope you remember call stack concept.
So what happens is let's say you have a function main and it makes a call to the function.
Hello?
Which further makes the function call to the, let's say, to a function
Hii.
So what happened is in the call stack, you will see that these functions will get started on top of
each other.
Okay.
And in the order in which they're called, and once the function hi is complete, it will go off.
Once the function hello is completed, it will go off.
And once the main is completed, it will also go off the recursion.
actually uses the concept of call stack, to store  all the states of these variables that we are
going to have.
So it will become more clear as we go through some more examples.
But for this video, the concept is, you understand at high level what recursion is going to do.
It is going to break down your complex problems into smaller problems.
We are going to solve those sub problems and get back our answer
Answers.
Okay, so let us see another example.
For example, we want to define an operation.
Go to home.
Let's say you are standing at.
Some coordinate, let's say some X coordinate and your home is at some value that is equal to N
And you want to reach this home and what you will do, one is you put a loop and you can simply do
take one step everytime.
But another thing you can do is you will see, okay, I will just take one step and I will ask
recursion to take me home from X + 1 till the end and okay, so the idea is you take one step and leave
the rest of the work for the recursion.
Okay?
So at this point can be solved recursively again in this part what you would be doing, take one step,
leave the rest work for recursion again take one step leave the rest, work for recursion okay.
And what would be the base case?
The base case would be if you are at the home, stop moving.
You don't need to go anywhere. in the recursive case.
Okay.
The other case in which we defined a recurrence like F(N) is nothing but N x F(N-1).
This case is known as the recursive case, but what would be recursive case for this problem?
You will take one step towards home and you will call the same function.
Go to home from X + 1
Okay, so if I show you in the form of a little bit of a pseudocode, so this is how the code would
look like.
So there is a method go go home which gets the current location and it also gets where the home is located
So you check if we have already reached the home, we will say, okay, we have reached the home and we return.
and we don't do anything for there.
Otherwise, what we do, we take one step and we call go home.
But that particular step.
Okay, so this is how a recursive code would look like.
So you can see we're calling the same function because we said that we are going to break down the problem
in terms of a smaller sub problem here.
Also, we have breaking down if we need N steps to reach the home.
So we have taken one step and we said, okay, the remaining and N-1 steps will be taken by the
same recursive function.
So this is a pseudocode.
And the idea is you understand at high level what is recursion and is going to do so.
Recursion is also related with the idea of principle of mathematical induction.
So you might have studied about this principle while in your school or in college.
So in this principle, what we actually try to do is we first figure out the smallest case.
Maybe we see what could be the smallest possible solution for the given problem, maybe what could
the value of F(0)
Maybe what could be the value of a F of one?
So this will depend upon what kind of question it is.
Okay.
So in some cases we may have F(0), F(1), maybe F(2) as well.
So we want to figure out what is the value of the smallest case.
For example, in case of a factorial, the smallest cases, zero factorial.
That is one.
Okay.
In case of a Fibonacci, there would be two smallest cases because to build Fibonacci series we need two initial
values, zero and one only.
Then we can build the next value.
So this we will look at later on as well.
First Step is always figured out the smallest case.
Then when you are writing code for the recursion, one assumption that you have always you always need
to take this.
Suppose you are breaking down your problem F(N) in maybe two sub problems f(N/3)
and maybe F(2N/3)
What do you need to assume that sub problems can be solved?
Okay.
So you have to assume that these two problems will be solved recursively.
Using this assumption, you have to write the recurrence.
Okay.
You have to write a recurrence for F(N).
How I can combine the solutions of the smaller sub problems to get the answer of F(N).
So once you do this, your code will work fine.
And you can also verify and think why your code works.
Okay.
So you have to solve the current problem, assuming this a problem solution exists.
So this is.
Our assumption, but it will actually work and we will prove it.
Why?
It works.
So we have to find out.
Okay, let's assume that some F(N-1) is true.
Or using this, we will find out.
Okay.
What is F(N)
In terms of F(N-1) or and minus or something.
Okay.
So it could be an easy problem.
It can be broken down in any, any way.
And it will depend upon problem to problem how we break down the problem into sub problems.
So this is a high level introduction about recursion.
And in the next lecture we will actually see an example along with the code.
That's all for this lecture.
Thank you.